.\" @(#)h_edit.1 91/04/23 NIST;
.\" I Image Recognition Group
.\" Stan Janet
.\"
.TH H_EDIT 1 "23 Apr 91"

.SH NAME
.nf
h_edit \- edit Sphere-format speech file headers
.fi

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBh_edit\fP [-cuvf] -{S|I|R}field=value ... [-D dir] file ...
\fBh_edit\fP [-cuvf] -{S|I|R}field=value ... -o outfile file
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
Sphere file headers can be modified using the utility \fIh_edit\fP.
In its first form, the specified file(s) is copied to a new directory
the \fI-D dir\fP option is present; otherwise the file(s) is to be
edited in-place. In its second form, the specified file is written
to a new file if the \fI-o outfile\fP option is present; otherwise
the file is to be edited in-place. The \fI-D\fP and \fI-o\fP options
are not compatible.

At least one file must be present on the command line, as well as
at least one field modifier.

If a specified field exists and the modifier
would change the type, the edit will fail with a "type mismatch".
Use
.I "h_delete(1)"
to delete the field first.

If a file is to be edited in-place and the editing does not
change the size of its header, the new header is written over the old
one and the speech samples do not need to be copied.

The update to version 2.0 of sphere forces restrictions on the use of 
certain fields and there types.  Consult sphere.doc in this distribution
for complete description of the required fields.

.SH OPTIONS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \-u
unlink the source files after creating new ones (requires -D or -o)
.TP
.B \-v
turns on verbose output
.TP
.B \-f
if edits fail for some fields of a file, continue trying others
.TP
.B "\-S fieldname=value"
change the string field's value (create if necessary)
.TP
.B "\-I fieldname=value"
change the integer field's value (create if necessary)
.TP
.B "\-R fieldname=value"
change the real number field's value (create if necessary)
.TP
.B "\-D directory"
copy output files to new directory, retaining source file basenames
.TP
.B "\-o outfile"
copy output file to specified destination file
.TP
.B "\-c"
compute and add a sample checksum, fieldname "sample_checksum", the
header.  The checksum is computed after all specified header
modifications have been made.
.PD

.SH "EXIT STATUS"
Zero if all edits succeed on all files, non-zero otherwise

.SH EXAMPLES
.PD 0
.TP
.B "h_edit -Sfoo=bar -Isamples=65536 f1.wav f2.wav"
Edit files f1.wav and f2.wav in-place, setting the values
of string field
.I foo
to bar and integer field
.I samples
to 65536.
.PD

.SH AUTHOR
Stan Janet (stan@jaguar.ncsl.nist.gov)
