.\" @(#)w_edit.1 94/06/01 NIST;
.\" NIST ASRG
.\" Jonathan G. Fiscus
.\"
.TH W_EDIT 1 "9 Apr 93"

.SH NAME
.nf
w_edit \-  Modify and/or extract samples from a SPHERE waveform file.
.fi

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBw_edit\fP [-vf] -o [-[t|p]F:T]] [-oOUT ] { filein | - } { fileout | - }
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION

W_edit is a waveform editing command to manipulate and extract samples
the waveform data in a sphere file.  

If the file size has been changed by either the '-t' or '-s' option,
the program adds (or modifies) three header fields to describe the
origins of the data.  Two "REAL" type header fields, 'start_time' and
'end_time', are added to store the begin and end times of the new file
in relation to the original file.  The third field, 'data_origins', is
added to identify original file.  The field contains a comma separated
list of fields from the original file including, "database_id",
"database_version" (if present), and either "conversation_id",
"utterance_id", or by default 'file1' from the command line.

The following functions can be performed on a file:

.TP 8
.B "\-tF:T"
Set the range for output from time F (seconds) to time T.
If F is missing, it defaults to the beginning of the file,
if T is missing, go to the end of the file. 
.TP 8
.B "\-sF:T"
Set the range for output from F samples to T samples.
If F is missing, it defaults to the beginning of the file,
if T is missing, go to the end of the file. 
.TP 8
.B "\-cEXP"
Extract only the samples from channels in EXP.  The 
expression will also add channels together if the '+'
is used.
.TP 8
.B "\-oOUT"
Set the output format to the following formats:
.RS
.TP 3
.B "ulaw"
output the samples as ulaw encoding.
.TP
.B "pcm_01 | short_01"
output the samples as PCM values in 01 sample_byte_format
.TP
.B "pcm_10 | short_10"
output the samples as PCM values in 10 sample_byte_format
.TP
.B "pcm | short_natural"
output the samples as PCM values in the cpu's natural byte format
.RE

.TP 8
.B "-v"
option gives verbose output.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PD 0
.TP
.B "w_edit -o short_10 -c2,1 stereo.wav reverse.wav"
Convert a file the short_10 format and change the channel
order of a stereo file.
.PD

.SH SEE ALSO
w_encode(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Jon Fiscus (jon@jaguar.ncsl.nist.gov)
