.\" @(#)w_encode.1 91/05/20 NIST;
.\" NIST ASRG
.\" Jonathan G. Fiscus
.\"
.TH W_ENCODE 1 "9 Apr 93"

.SH NAME
.nf
w_encode \- Encode the input file into the output format specified by "-o".
.fi

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBw_encode\fP [-mvf] [ -t ENC ] file_in file_out
\fBw_encode\fP [-mvi] [ -t ENC ] file1 file2 . . .

.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION

Compress/Encode the file as the type defined by the "-t" option.  The
output compression/encodings may be:

.RS
wavpack | shorten | ulaw
.RE

The program will use the header information to optimize the
compression scheme.  The default operation is to encode the file
specified in "file_in" and place the contents into the file specified
in "file_out".  If the filenames specified in "file_in" or "file_out"
are "-", then stdin and stdout are used respectively.  In addition, an
error will be generated if "file_out" already exists. The "-f" option
causes an existing "file_out" to be overwritten.

The waveform I/O routines automatically convert the byte order of a
file to the host machine's natural format.  The "-m" option forces
the encoding to maintain the original byte order of "file_in".

The "-i" option forces w_encode to replace the input file with it's
encoded version.  When this "in place" option is used, the header is
modified to indicate the new encoding as well.  This option also
allows more than one input file to be specified on the command line.

The "-v" option gives verbose output.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PD 0
.TP
.B "w_encode -o wavpack uncomp.wav comp.wav"
compress a SPHERE headered file into \fIcomp.wav\fP.
.PD

.SH SEE ALSO
w_decode(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Jon Fiscus (jon@jaguar.ncsl.nist.gov)
