@c
@c intro.texi -- SPro Manual Introduction
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2003 Guillaume Gravier (ggravier@irisa.fr)
@c
@c $Author: ggravier $
@c $Date: 2003/08/22 16:18:32 $
@c $Revision: 1.2 $
@c

@c >>>>> This file is included by sprodoc.texi

@c --*-- ------------ --*--
@c --*-- Introduction --*--
@c --*-- ------------ --*--
@node Introduction, Speech analysis, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

@menu
* Overview::                    What is SPro good for?
* Content::                     How to read this document?
* Installing::                  SPro installation
* Bugs::                        Reporting bugs
* Contributors::                People who contributed
@end menu

@c --*-- Overview --*--
@node Overview, Content, Introduction, Introduction
@section What is SPro?

SPro is a speech signal processing toolkit which provides runtime
commands implementing standard feature extraction algorithms for speech
and speaker recognition applications and a C library to implement new
algorithms and to use SPro files within your own programs.

SPro was originally designed for variable resolution spectral analysis
but also provides for feature extraction techniques classically used in
speech applications. There are commands for the following
representations:
@itemize @bullet
@item 
filter-bank energies
@item
cepstral coefficients (filter-bank or linear prediction)
@item
linear prediction derived representation (prediction and reflection
coefficients, log area ratios and line spectrum pairs)
@end itemize

@noindent
Though the toolkit has been designed as a front-end for applications
such as speech or speaker recognition, we believe the library provides
enough possibilities to implement various feature extraction algorithms
easily (e.g. zero crossing rate). However, no command for such features
is provided.

The library, written in ANSI C, provides functions for the following:
@itemize @bullet
@item
waveform signal input
@item
low-level signal processing (FFT, LPC analysis, etc.)
@item
low-level feature processing (lifter, CMS, variance
normalization, deltas, etc.)
@item
feature I/O
@end itemize
The library does not provide for high-level feature extraction functions
which directly converts a waveform into features, mainly because such
functions would require a tremendous number of arguments in order to be
versatile. However, it is rather trivial to write such a function for
your particular needs using the SPro library.

@c --*-- Content --*--
@node Content, Installing, Overview, Introduction
@section How to read this manual?

The manual is divided into three main parts: 
@enumerate
@item
user manual
@item
programmer manual
@item
reference manual
@end enumerate

@ref{SPro tools} is the user manual. It provides a description of the
speech analysis algorithms involved (@pxref{Speech analysis}) and
explains in details the use and the implementation of the SPro commands
@command{sfbank}, @command{sfbcep}, @command{slpc}, @command{slpcep} and
@command{scopy}. @ref{File formats} describes the supported waveform
file formats and the SPro feature file format. The next sections are
dedicated to the detailed description of the SPro tools.

@ref{SPro library} is the programmer manual which describes the library
main data structures and the associated functions.

@ref{Reference guide} provides a quick reference manual for the SPro
tools syntax.

If you have been using a former version of SPro, read
@ref{Compatibility} carefully for crucial information on the
(in)compatibility of SPro @value{VERSION} with the previous versions.

Finally, to learn more about the evolution of SPro, the history of the
various SPro releases is detailed in @ref{Changes}.

@c --*-- Installing --*--
@node Installing, Bugs, Content, Introduction
@section Installing SPro

@cindex installation

Installation follows the standard GNU installation procedure. The two
following lines in your favorite shell
@example
  ./configure
  make
@end example
@noindent
will build the library and the runtimes. SPro supports some extra
features based on some external packages. These features can be turned
on/off (depending on whether you have them already installed on your
machine) using the @option{--with-xxx} options of the configure
script. Supported enable options are:
@example
  --with-sphere[=path]     SPHERE 2.6 file format support
@end example
@noindent
If the @acronym{SPHERE} library is installed in a standard place on your
system (e.g.@: @samp{/usr/local/include} and @samp{/usr/local/lib}),
there is no need to specify @var{path}. Otherwise, @var{path} should
point to the directory where the @acronym{SPHERE} library has been
installed. @command{configure} will search for the library includes in
@var{path}@code{/include} and for the archives in @var{path}@code{/lib}.
Compiling SPro with the @option{-O3} option of the @command{gcc}
compiler (@code{CFLAGS=-O3}) is a good idea for sake of rapidity.

Before installing, you may want to check your build by typing
@example
  make check 
@end example

Finally, installing the library, the runtimes and the info documentation
can be done running
@example
  make install
@end example
The installation path is specified by the configuration script (try
@command{./configure --help} for details) and defaults to
@samp{/usr/local}.

See file @file{INSTALL} in the distribution top directory for more
details.

To the author knowledge, SPro has been successfully build and used on
Linux, SPARC/SunOS, and HP-UX. It should also work on AIX though this
has not been tested so far.

@c --*-- Bugs --*--
@node Bugs, Contributors, Installing, Introduction
@section Reporting bugs

@cindex bugs, reporting

Bugs should be reported to @email{ggravier@@irisa.fr}. Feel free to
submit a diagnostic or even a patch along with your bug report if you
kindly bothered to do the trouble-shooting. This is always appreciated.

@c --*-- Bugs --*--
@node Contributors,  , Bugs, Introduction
@section Contributors

@cindex contributors

Along the years, SPro has benefited from the help of several
contributors. Here is a list, in alphabetical order, of the main
contributors: Rapha@"el Blouet, Pierre Duhamel, Johnny Mariethoz, Sylvain
Meigner, Alexey Ozerov and Jacques Prado.

@c Local Variables:
@c ispell-local-dictionary: "american"
@c End:
