@c user.texi -- SPro User Manual
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2003 Guillaume Gravier (ggravier@irisa.fr)
@c
@c $Author: ggravier $
@c $Date: 2003/08/22 16:18:32 $
@c $Revision: 1.2 $
@c

@c >>>>> This file is included by sprodoc.texi

@c --*-- ---------- --*--
@c --*-- SPro tools --*--
@c --*-- ---------- --*--
@node SPro tools, SPro library, Speech analysis, Top
@chapter The SPro tools

@menu
* File formats::                Waveform and feature file formats
* Common options::              Tools common options
* I/O via stdin and stdout::    Standard input, standard output and pipes
* Extracting features::         Feature extraction with SPro
* Manipulating features::       The scopy utility for manipulating feature streams
@end menu

@c
@c --*-- File formats --*--
@c
@node File formats, Common options, SPro tools, SPro tools
@section File formats
@cindex file formats

@menu
* Waveform file format::        Supported input waveform file formats
* Feature file format::         Output feature file format
@end menu

This section describes the file formats manipulated by SPro. Most SPro
tools input signal from a @emph{waveform stream} and output feature
vectors to a @emph{feature stream}.

@c -- Waveform stream format
@node Waveform file format, Feature file format, File formats, File formats
@subsection Waveform streams
@cindex format, waveform streams
@cindex file format, waveform streams
@cindex waveform, file format

Waveform streams are files which contains the signal samples, either in
raw @acronym{PCM} format or in an encoded format to save disk
space. Currently, SPro supports raw, mono, 16 bits/sample files as well
as @sc{wave} and optionally @sc{sphere}@footnote{S@sc{phere} is the file
format used by most @acronym{NIST} tools and databases. See
@url{http://www.nist.gov/speech} for the SPHERE package.} files.  The
@sc{sphere} format is only supported if SPro has been compiled with the
@sc{sphere} library (@option{--with-sphere} in @command{configure}). Raw
format (i.e.@: with no header) with a 8 kHz sample rate is the default
assumed by SPro if not otherwise specified.

Waveform are considered as streams by SPro and are read via an input
buffer which means they can be of arbitrary (even infinite) length. Even
file formats for which the number of samples is known in advance from
the header will not be entirely loaded into memory. In particular, this
mechanism makes it possible to read waveforms from the standard input
even though the number of signals is not known offhand. One particularly
interesting consequence is the possibility to pipe the output of an
external command into the input of a SPro command. For example, it is
possible using a pipe to support file formats which are not supported by
SPro. The following line
@example
  madplay --left --output=raw:- foo.mp3 | sfbcep -f 11025 - foo.mfcc
@end example
@noindent
shows how to decode the left channel of an MP3 encoded file
(@file{foo.mp3}) into a raw, mono, 16 bits/sample file which is then
piped into the @command{sfbcep} tool, assuming the sample rate of the
MP3 file is 11,025 Hz.

@c -- Feature stream format
@node Feature file format,  , Waveform file format, File formats
@subsection Feature streams
@cindex format, feature streams
@cindex file format, feature streams
@cindex header format
@cindex variable length header format

A feature streams is a file containing feature vectors. The format used
to store the feature vectors is specific to SPro and consists of a
header followed by data. The header itself is divided in two parts, an
optional variable length header and a fixed length compulsory header.

To avoid byte-order problems, binary parts of the feature streams, such
as the fixed length header and the feature vectors, are always stored in
little-endian format (Intel-like processor) and therefore must be
swapped if read on a big-endian (Motorola-like processor) machine. Byte
swapping is automatically taken care of when using the library functions
to read SPro streams. @xref{SPro library}, for details on SPro stream
I/O functions.

The variable length header is an optional ASCII header containing
@samp{attribute = value} statements, starting with a @samp{<header>} tag
and ending with @samp{</header>}. The following is a sample variable
length header:
@example
@group
<header>
a_field = an arbitrary value;            # a comment

date = Wed Jul 23 14:59:12 CEST 2003;    # this is the date
snr = 20 dB;                             # SNR
</header>
@end group
@end example
@noindent
Both the @samp{attribute} and @samp{value} strings are arbitrary. Note
that as of now, none of the SPro tools output variable length
headers. However, such headers are supported and can be added using the
@command{cat} or @command{bcat} command. For example, the command
@example
bcat header.txt foo.mfcc > bar.mfcc
@end example
@noindent
could be used to add the variable length header contained in file
@file{header.txt} to the output of an SPro command @file{foo.prm}, the
resulting file being @file{bar.prm}. The header file @file{header.txt}
is a regular text file containing text such as given in the example
above, where the last line of the file must consist of the
@samp{</header>} tag, possibly with a carriage return.

The compulsory fixed length header is a 10 byte binary header containing
the feature vector dimension@footnote{Note that, as opposed to previous
versions if SPro, the dimension in the header correspond to the total
feature vector dimension.} (@code{unsigned short} = 2 bytes), a flag
describing the content of the feature vector (@code{long} = 4 bytes) and
the frame rate in Hz (@code{float} = 4 bytes). The feature stream
description flag is actually a field of bits with the following meaning
@multitable @columnfractions .1 .1 .1 .7
@item
@ 
@tab @strong{bit}
@tab @strong{letter}
@tab @strong{description}

@item
@ 
@tab 1
@tab @samp{E}
@tab feature vector contains log-energy. 

@item
@ 
@tab 2
@tab @samp{Z}
@tab mean has been removed

@item
@ 
@tab 3
@tab @samp{N}
@tab static log-energy has been suppressed (always with @samp{E} and @samp{D})

@item
@ 
@tab 4
@tab @samp{D}
@tab feature vector contains delta coefficients

@item
@ 
@tab 5
@tab @samp{A}
@tab feature vector contains delta-delta coefficients (always with @samp{D})

@item
@ 
@tab 5
@tab @samp{R}
@tab variance has been normalized (always with @samp{Z})

@end multitable
@noindent
The letter in the second column corresponds to the letter used in all
the SPro tools to modify or visualize the feature description
flags. 

Feature vectors, or data, are stored after the header in time ascending
order. A feature vector is a binary vector of @code{float}'s as
illustrated in the following example
@example
@group
+-----------------+---+-----------------+----+-----------------+---+
|     static      | E |      delta      | dE |    delta delta  |ddE|
+-----------------+---+-----------------+----+-----------------+---+
@end group
@end example
@noindent
with the static coefficient first, optionally followed by the
log-energy, the delta and delta-delta features as indicated by the
feature description flag. 

@c
@c --*-- Common options --*--
@c
@node Common options, I/O via stdin and stdout, File formats, SPro tools
@section Common options
@cindex options, common

Here is a list of options common to all (or most of) the tools. The
@command{scopy} feature manipulation tool options slightly differ from
the list below since most of the options are concerned with waveform
processing.

@menu
* I/O options::                 Common I/O options
* Framing options::             Common frame blocking options
* Feature vector options::      Common feature vector extraction options
* Miscellaneous options::       More common options
@end menu

@c -- I/O options
@node I/O options, Framing options, Common options, Common options
@subsection I/O options
@cindex options, I/O

The following options are used to control the waveform and feature
I/Os:
@table @code
@item -F, --format=str
@itemx
Specify the input waveform file format. The format string @code{str} is
one of @samp{PCM16}, @samp{wave} or @samp{sphere}, the latter being
possible only if SPro was compiled with the @sc{sphere}
library. Argument is case insensitive. Default value is @samp{PCM16}.

@item -f, --sample-rate=f
@itemx
Set input waveform sample rate to @code{f} Hz for @samp{PCM16} waveform
files. This option is ignored for waveform file formats for which the
sample rate is specified in the header. Default value is 8,000 Hz.

@item -x, --channel=n
@itemx
For multiple channel waveform files, set the channel to consider for
feature extraction. Default value is 1.

@item -B, --swap
@itemx
Swap the input waveform samples. This is particularly useful for
waveform files generated on a machine with a different endian. Default
is not to swap.

@item -I, --input-bufsize=n
@itemx
Set the input buffer size to @code{n} kbytes. The smaller the input
buffer size, the more disk access and therefore, the slower the program
is. So you will have to choose between speed and memory! Default is 10
Mbytes.

@item -O, --output-bufsize=n
@itemx
Set the output buffer size to @code{n} kbytes. Again, you need a
compromise between speed and memory requirements. However, one important
point is that global processing such as mean subtraction, energy
normalization and delta computation are done on the buffer basis (i.e.@:
such processings are done only when the buffer is full or at the end of
the stream, whichever comes first) which introduces some inconsistencies
at the buffer boundaries@footnote{This is a known 'bug' that should be
corrected someday. It is actually rather impossible to correct the bug
for global normalization which would require to store all of the data
into memory. However, it is possible --- and probably desirable --- to
correct things when a sliding window is specified.}. Using a small
output buffer size can then result in many boundary problems and it is
recommended not to diminish the output buffer size below a couple of
thousand frames. Default is 10 Mbytes.
@end table

@c -- Framing options
@node Framing options, Feature vector options, I/O options, Common options
@subsection Waveform framing options
@cindex options, waveform framing

Waveform framing is driven by the following options:
@table @code
@item -k, --pre-emphasis=f
@itemx
Set the pre-emphasis coefficient to @code{f}. Default is 0.95.

@item -l --length=f
@itemx
Set the analysis frame length to @code{f} ms. Default is 20.0 ms.

@item -d, --shift=f
@itemx
Set the interval between two consecutive frames to @code{f} ms. Default is
10.0 ms.

@item -w, --window=str            
@itemx
Specify the waveform weighting window. The window is one of
@samp{Hamming}, @samp{Hanning}, @samp{Blackman} or @samp{none}. If the
argument is @samp{none}, no window is applied. Argument is case
insensitive. Default is @samp{Hamming}.
@end table

@c -- Normalization and dynamics
@node Feature vector options, Miscellaneous options, Framing options, Common options
@subsection Feature vector options
@cindex option, feature vector content

The following options are used to control the content of the output
feature vectors, enabling global normalizations and dynamic feature
computation:
@table @code
@item -Z, --cms
@itemx
Perform mean normalization.

@item -R, --normalize
@itemx
Perform variance normalization. Variance normalization is only possible
if @option{--cms} is also specified. Otherwise, an error is generated.

@item -L, --segment-length=n
@itemx
Set normalization and energy scaling segment length. If this option is
specified, mean, variance or max calculation is performed using a
sliding window of @samp{n} frames. Default is to calculate mean,
variance or max globally when flushing the output buffer. This argument
is ignored if neither @option{--cms} nor @option{--normalize} are
specified.

@item -D, --delta
@itemx
Add first order derivatives to the feature vector.

@item -A, --acceleration
@itemx
Add second order derivatives to the feature vector. This is only
possible if @option{--delta} is also specified. Otherwise, an error is
generated.

@item -N, --no-static-energy
@itemx
Remove static log-energy from the feature vector. This is only possible
if @option{--delta} is also specified. Otherwise, an error is generated.
@end table

@c -- Miscellaneous options
@node Miscellaneous options,  , Feature vector options, Common options
@subsection Miscellaneous options
@cindex options, miscellaneous

Last but not least, here are some very practical options (specially the
second one):
@table @code
@item -v, --verbose
@itemx 
Turn on verbose mode

@item -h, --help
@itemx
Print a help message for the tool and exit.

@item -V, --version
@itemx
Print version information and exit.
@end table

@c
@c --*-- I/O via stdin and stdout --*--
@c
@node I/O via stdin and stdout, Extracting features, Common options, SPro tools
@section I/O via stdin and stdout
@cindex I/O, stdin and stdout
@cindex input, stdin
@cindex output, stdout
@cindex pipes, using pipes with SPro

Every SPro command requires that input and output files are explicitly
specified. However, in the very Unix philosophy, the special symbol
@samp{-} (dash) can be used as input file to specify that input is to be
read from @code{stdin} or as output file to specify that output should
be directed to @code{stdout}.

The use of standard input and output makes it possible to pipe the SPro
commands one after the other or even with external programs. The example
@example
sfbcep foo.lin - |  scopy -o ascii - -
@end example
@noindent
illustrates the use of pipes to list the feature vectors directly from
the waveform file @file{foo.lin}. Another particularly useful example of
pipes with SPro commands is given in @ref{Waveform streams}.

@c 
@c --*-- Extracting features
@c
@node Extracting features, Manipulating features, I/O via stdin and stdout, SPro tools
@section Extracting features

@menu
* Filter-bank analysis tools::  Tools for filter-bank derived features
* LPC analysis tools::          Tools for linear prediction derived features
@end menu

@c -- Filter-bank analysis tools
@node Filter-bank analysis tools, LPC analysis tools, Extracting features, Extracting features
@subsection Filter-bank analysis tools
@cindex filter-bank, tools

The tools @command{sfbank} and @command{sfbcep} are dedicated to
filter-bank based speech analysis.

@menu
* Filter-bank magnitudes::      All about @command{sfbank}
* Filter-bank cepstrum::        All about @command{sfbcep}
* Filter-bank options::         @command{sfbank} and @command{sfbcep} options
@end menu

@c -- Filter-bank magnitudes
@node Filter-bank magnitudes, Filter-bank cepstrum, Filter-bank analysis tools, Filter-bank analysis tools
@unnumberedsubsubsec Filter-bank log-magnitude features
@cindex @command{sfbank}

The first filter-bank analysis tool, @command{sfbank}, takes as input a
waveform and output filter-bank magnitude features. For each frame, the
FFT is performed on the windowed signal, possibly after zero padding,
and the magnitude is computed before being integrated using a triangular
filter-bank. @xref{Filter-banks}, for mathematical details. To avoid
numerical problems, a threshold is used to keep channel log-magnitudes
positive or null. The signal bandwidth may be artificially limited by
specifying lower and higher frequencies using the @option{--freq-min}
and @option{--freq-max} options respectively. In this case, the central
frequencies of the filter-bank channels are regularly taken in the
specified bandwidth. Even if frequency warping is used, the lower and
upper frequencies are specified in the linear frequency domain, though,
of course, the filter's central frequencies will be taken regularly in
the transformed domain. Both M@sc{el} and bilinear frequency warping
are possible with @command{sfbank}.

First and second order derivatives can be appended to the filter-bank
log-magnitude features using @option{--delta} and
@option{--acceleration} respectively.

@c Filter-bank cepstrum
@node Filter-bank cepstrum, Filter-bank options, Filter-bank magnitudes, Filter-bank analysis tools
@unnumberedsubsubsec Filter-bank cepstral features
@cindex @command{sfbcep}

The second filter-bank analysis tool, @command{sfbcep}, takes as input a
waveform and output filter-bank derived cepstral features. The
filter-bank processing is similar to what is done in @command{sfbank}
(see previous section). The cepstral coefficients are computed by
DCT'ing the filter-bank log-magnitudes and possibly liftered.

Optionally, the log-energy can be added to the feature vector. In
@command{sfbcep}, the frame energy is calculated as the sum of the
squared waveform samples after windowing. As for the magnitudes in the
filter-bank, the log-energy are thresholded to keep them positive or
null. The log-energies may be scaled to avoid differences between
recordings.

Mean and variance normalization of the static cepstral coefficients can
be specified with the global @option{--cms} and @option{--normalize}
options but do not apply to log-energies. The normalizations can be
global (default) or based on a sliding window whose length is specified
with @option{--segment-length}.

Finally, first and second order derivatives of the cepstral coefficients
and of the log-energies can be appended to the feature vectors. When
using delta features, the absolute log-energy can be suppressed using
the @option{--no-static-energy} option.

@c Options
@node Filter-bank options,  , Filter-bank cepstrum, Filter-bank analysis tools
@unnumberedsubsubsec Options

The following options are available for both @command{sfbank} and
@command{sfbcep}.
@table @code
@item -n, --num-filters=n
@itemx
Specify the number of channels in the filter bank. Default is 24.

@item -a, --alpha=f             
@itemx
Use bilinear frequency warping and set the warping parameter @math{a}
to @code{f}@ (@code{f} must be between 0 and 1).  This option is
incompatible with @option{--mel} and will be overwritten by the
latter. Default is no warping.

@item -m, --mel                 
@itemx
Use M@sc{el} frequency warping. This option overwrites the
@option{--alpha} one as both are incompatible. Default is no warping.

@item -i, --freq-min=f          
@itemx
Specify band limiting and set the lower frequency bound to @code{f}
Hz. Default is no band limiting.

@item -u, --freq-max=f 
@itemx
Specify band limiting and set the upper frequency bound to @code{f}
Hz. Default is no band limiting.

@item -b, --fft-length=n 
@itemx
Set FFT length to @code{n} samples. The FFT length must be a power of
two and greater than or equal to the number of samples in a frame. If
FFT length is greater, the windowed frame samples are padded with zeroes
before running the Fourier transform.
@end table

@noindent
The following options are also available for @command{sfbcep}.
@table @code
@item -p, --num-ceps=n
Set the number of output cepstral coefficients to @code{n}@. @code{n}
must be less or equal to the number of channels in the filter
bank. Default is 12.

@item -r, --lifter=n 
Set liftering parameter @math{L} to @code{n}. Default is no liftering.

@item -e, --energy
@itemx
Add log-energy to the feature vector.

@item -s, --scale-energy=f
@itemx
Scale energy according to @math{e_t = 1 + f (e_t - max_t(e_t))}. The way
the maximum energy value is computed depends on whether
@option{--segment-length} is specified or not.
@end table

@noindent
@command{sfbank} supports the @option{--delta} and
@option{--acceleration} options. In addition, @command{sfbcep} also
supports the @option{--cms} and @option{--normalize}
options. @xref{Common options}, for a description of these options and
for additional ones.

@c -- LPC analysis tools
@node LPC analysis tools,  , Filter-bank analysis tools, Extracting features
@subsection LPC analysis tools
@cindex linear prediction, tools

SPro provides two different tools, @command{slpc} and @command{slpcep},
for linear predictive analysis of speech signals.

@menu
* Linear prediction coefficients::  All about @command{slpc}
* Linear prediction cepstrum::  All about @command{slpcep}
* LPC Options::                 @command{slpc} and @command{slpcep} options
@end menu

@c Linear prediction coefficients
@node Linear prediction coefficients, Linear prediction cepstrum, LPC analysis tools, LPC analysis tools
@unnumberedsubsubsec Linear prediction coefficients
@cindex @command{slpc}

The tool @command{slpc} takes as input a waveform and output linear
prediction derived features. For each frame, the signal is windowed
after pre-emphasis and the generalized correlation is computed and
further used to estimate the reflection and the prediction coefficients
which can, in turn, be transformed into log area ratios or line spectrum
frequencies. @xref{Linear prediction}, for mathematical details. The
default is to output the linear prediction coefficients however
reflection coefficients can be obtained with the @option{--parcor}
option, log-area ratios with @option{--lar} option and line spectrum
pairs with the @option{--lsp} one.

Optionally, the log-energy can be added to the feature vector. In
@command{slpc}, the log-energy is taken as the linear prediction filter
gain, which is also the variance of prediction error, and thresholded to
be positive or null.  The log-energies may be scaled to avoid
differences between recordings using the @option{--scale-energy}
option. 

@c Linear prediction cepstrum
@node Linear prediction cepstrum, LPC Options, Linear prediction coefficients, LPC analysis tools
@unnumberedsubsubsec Linear prediction cepstrum
@cindex @command{slpcep}

Program @command{slpcep} takes as input a waveform and outputs cepstral
coefficients derived from the linear prediction filter coefficients. The
linear prediction processing steps are as in @command{slpc} (see
previous section) and cepstral coefficients are computed from the linear
prediction coefficients using the recursion previously described. The
required number of cepstral coefficients must be less then or equal to
the prediction order.

As for @command{slpc}, the log-energy, taken as the gain of the linear
prediction filter, can be added to the feature vectors.

Mean and variance normalization of the static cepstral coefficients can
be specified with the global @option{--cms} and @option{--normalize}
options but do not apply to log-energies. The normalizations can be
global (default) or based on a sliding window whose length is specified
with @option{--segment-length}.

Finally, first and second order derivatives of the cepstral coefficients
and of the log-energies can be appended to the feature vectors. When
using delta features, the absolute log-energy can be suppressed using
the @option{--no-static-energy} option.

@c LPC Options
@node LPC Options,  , Linear prediction cepstrum, LPC analysis tools
@unnumberedsubsubsec Options

The following options are available for both @command{slpc} and
@command{slpcep}.
@table @code
@item -n, --order=n
@itemx
Specify the linear prediction analysis order. Default is 24.

@item -a, --alpha=f             
@itemx
Use bilinear frequency warping and set the warping parameter @math{a}
to @code{f}@ (@code{f} must be between 0 and 1). Default is no warping.

@item -r, --parcor
Output reflection coefficients rather than linear prediction
coefficients.

@item -g, --lar
Output log area ratios rather than linear prediction coefficients.

@item -p, --lsp
Output line spectrum pairs rather than linear prediction coefficients.

@item -e, --energy
@itemx
Add log-energy to the feature vector.

@item -s, --scale-energy=f
@itemx
Scale energy according to @math{e_t = 1 + f (e_t - max_t(e_t))}. The way
the maximum energy value is computed depends on whether
@option{--segment-length} is specified or not.
@end table

@noindent
The following options are also available for @command{slpcep}.
@table @code
@item -p, --num-ceps=n
Set the number of output cepstral coefficients to @code{n}@. @code{n}
must be less or equal to the number of channels in the filter
bank. Default is 12.

@item -r, --lifter=n 
Set liftering parameter @math{L} to @code{n}. Default is no liftering.

@end table

@noindent
Also, @command{slpcep} supports the @option{--cms} and
@option{--normalize} normalization options as well as @option{--delta}
and @option{--acceleration}. @xref{Common options}, for a description of
these options and for additional ones.

@c
@c --*-- Manipulating features --*--
@c
@node Manipulating features,  , Extracting features, SPro tools
@section Manipulating feature streams
@cindex @command{scopy}

SPro provides a tool, @command{scopy} for manipulating feature
streams. More than a mere copy tool, @command{scopy} also allows to
normalize features, add dynamic features, scale the features, apply a
linear transformation to the feature vectors and extract some components
of the feature vector. All of these operations are detailed below. In
addition, @command{scopy} can import feature files from previous SPro
release, export files to alien formats such as HTK, or view the content
of an SPro feature file in text format.

@menu
* Operations on feature streams::  Maniuplating feature streams with @command{scopy}
* Exporting features::          Exporting features to alien formats with @command{scopy}
* Importing from a previous SPro release::  Compatibility questions
* Copy options::                @command{scopy} options
@end menu

@c -- Operations on feature streams
@node Operations on feature streams, Exporting features, Manipulating features, Manipulating features
@subsection Operations on feature streams

@cindex linear transformation
@cindex extracting components
@cindex delta, adding features
@cindex acceleration, adding features

As mentioned in the introduction, @command{scopy} may be used for
@enumerate a
@item
mean and variance normalization,

@item 
dynamic features computation,

@item
multiplicative scaling,

@item
linear transformation, and

@item
components extraction.
@end enumerate

The two first transformations, i.e.@: normalization and dynamic feature
computation, are actually done at once when loading the input
features. If normalization is specified, the static coefficients, not
including energy, are normalized before delta and acceleration features
are computed. If dynamic feature are used, the static log-energy can be
discarded using @option{--no-static-energy}. As in all the feature
extraction tools, normalization is either global or based on a sliding
window, depending on whether @option{--segment-length} was specified or
not.

Multiplicative scaling is a simple operation which consists in
multiplying every component of every feature vector by a scaling
factor. This is sometimes used to reduce the variance of features with a
high dynamic range in order to avoid numerical problems when computing a
linear transformation for those features or when doing some modeling.

A linear transformation matrix can be specified using
@option{--transform} to project the input feature vectors according to
@math{y'(t) = A z(t)}, where @math{y'(t)} is the transformed vector for
frame @math{t} and @math{z(t)} is a column vector containing the input
feature frame @math{y(t)} plus possibly some context
frames@footnote{Frames are duplicated at the (buffer) boundaries.}. For
example, assuming a context size @math{k}, @math{z(t)} will be the
concatenation of input feature vectors @math{y(t-k)} to
@math{y(t+k)}. If @math{m} is the input feature dimension, possibly
after adding the dynamic features if this was asked, and @math{n} the
output dimension, the transformation matrix will have
@code{nrows}=@math{n} rows and @code{ncols}=@math{(2 k + 1) * m}
columns. The matrix @math{A} is stored in a text file with the following
syntax
@example
nrows ncols nsplice
A[1][0]      A[1][1]   .........   A[1][ncols]
                        .........
A[nrows][0]            .........   A[nrows][ncols]
@end example
@noindent
where @code{nsplice} is the context size.

Component extraction consists in extracting some components of the
feature vectors. The extraction pattern is specified using the
@option{--extract=str} option where @code{str} is a comma separated list
of components to keep. The latter are specified either as a single
component index or as a index range using a dash (@samp{-}). Component
indices start at 1. For example, the command
@example
scopy --extract=1-12,25-36 foo.prm bar.prm
@end example
@noindent
could be used to extract components 1 to 12 and 25 to 36 from
@file{foo.prm} into @file{bar.prm}, which, one can imagine, would
correspond to keeping the 12 static features and the 12 acceleration
features, thus discarding the delta features.

When performing either linear transformation or component extraction,
the content of the resulting feature vector can no longer be described
using a feature description flag. Indeed, specifying if a vector as
delta features after a linear transformation does make no sense. For
this reason, the output stream description flag will be arbitrarily set
to zero if at least one of this transformation is specified.

If several operations are specified, they are applied in the order in
which they are listed above. Therefore, delta coefficients are computed
before the linear transformation if both are specified. As for now,
there is unfortunately no direct and easy way to change the order of
these operations. In particular, it is not possible to add delta
coefficients after linear transformation which is an operation that does
not seem illogical. The easiest, though CPU consuming, way to change the
processing order is to use @command{scopy} several times, possibly with
pipes. For example, the line
@example
scopy --transform=pca.mat foo.prm - | scopy -ZD - bar.prm
@end example
@noindent
will apply the linear transformation stored in file @file{pca.mat} to
the feature vectors in @file{foo.prm} (first @command{scopy}) and then
remove the mean of the static features before adding the delta features
and store the result in @file{bar.prm} (second @command{scopy}).

@c -- Exporting to alien formats
@node Exporting features, Importing from a previous SPro release, Operations on feature streams, Manipulating features
@subsection Exporting features

Exporting feature streams to alien formats is also possible with
@command{scopy}. Currently, three alien formats are supported, namely
@acronym{HTK}@footnote{@acronym{HTK} is a popular Hidden Markov Model
Toolkit from Cambridge University, @url{http://htk.eng.cam.ac.uk}.},
Sirocco@footnote{Sirocco is a free large vocabulary speech recognition
search engine, @url{http://www.enst.fr/~sirocco}} and @acronym{ASCII}
text format.

Export to @acronym{HTK} and Sirocco file formats is only possible on
seekable streams, i.e.@: regular files in which the C function
@code{fseek} works. The reason for this constraint is that those formats
include the number of frames in the header. Since the number of frames
is not in the SPro header, @command{sopy} uses @code{fseek} to seek to
the end of the input feature stream in order to determine the number of
frames. As a consequence, it is not possible to export to one of these
alien formats when reading from a pipe. On the other hand, no seek in
the output file is therefore necessary and the output of @command{scopy}
can be piped into another command. This is particularly usefull with
@acronym{HTK}, where setting the environment variable @env{HPARMFILTER}
to @samp{scopy -o HTK $ -}, enables to read directly read SPro files
with @acronym{HTK}. See section @emph{"Input/Output via Pipes and
Networks"} in the HTK 3.2 book for details.

Export to ASCII is useful to list in a (almost) human-readable way the
content of a feature stream. In particular, combining the ASCII output
with the @option{--info} option which gives information about the
content of the stream. This option is also useful to visualize the
different operations performed on the input feature streams and their
order. For example, the command
@example
scopy -i -ZDA -t xxx.mat -x 1-3,7 -z foo.prm -
@end example
@noindent
will produce the following output
@example
@group
sample_rate = 100.000000
input:     dim=12  (<nil>)
convert:   dim=36  (ZDA)
transform: dim=10  (xxx.mat)
extract:   dim=4   (1-3,7)
@end group
@end example
@noindent
In the above example, the input file dimension is 12 is then modified to
36 by adding the dynamic coefficients (@option{-ZDA}) and further
reduced to 10 using the linear transform in @file{xxx.mat} before being
decimated to 4 by extracting components 1 to 3 and 7 of the resulting
feature vectors.

As mentioned in @ref{File formats}, SPro feature files are always in
little endian byte order. On the contrary, exported files are written in
the machine's natural byte order. As both @acronym{HTK} and Sirocco
expects files in big-endian byte order@footnote{In @acronym{HTK}, this
actually depends whether or not @code{NATURALREADORDER=T} was specified
in your configuration file.}, the option @option{--swap} can be used to
swap the byte order before writing the file in alien file formats. This
option is ignored if the output file format is ASCII (obviously) or
SPro.

@c -- Importing from a previous SPro release
@node Importing from a previous SPro release, Copy options, Exporting features, Manipulating features
@subsection Importing from a previous SPro release

The option @option{--compatibility} is provided for compatibility and
enables to read feature files from previous versions of SPro. When this
option is used, the entire feature file is loaded into memory at once as
this used to be the case in previous versions. Using this options with
large files may therefore be quite memory consuming (and slow by the
same occasion). All the processing capabilities (normalization, dynamic
features, linear transform, etc.) remains possible when importing files
from previous SPro versions.

@c -- scopy options
@node Copy options,  , Importing from a previous SPro release, Manipulating features
@subsection Copy options

The following options are available in @command{scopy}:
@table @code
@item -c, --compatibility       
@itemx
Turn on compatibility and set the input file format to former SPro
format. Default is SPro @value{VERSION} format.

@item -I, --bufsize=n
@itemx
Set the I/O buffer size in kbytes. Default is 10 Mbytes. If
@option{--compatibility} is specified, the specified buffer size applies
only to the output buffer, the entire input data being loaded into
memory.

@item -i, --info
@itemx
Print stream information.

@item -z, --suppress
@itemx
Suppress data output. If this option is turned on, no output is
created. This option is provided mainly for use with @option{--info} in
order to print the stream description flag or for diagnosis purposes.

@item -B, --swap
@itemx
Swap byte order before writing new file. Byte swapping is only possible
if the output format is either @acronym{HTK} or Sirocco (see
@option{--output-format} below). Default is to use the machine's natural
byte-order.

@item -o, --output-format=str
@itemx
Set the output format, where @code{str} is one of @code{ascii},
@code{htk} or @code{sirocco}. Default is the native SPro format.

@item -m, --scale=f
@itemx
Scale features, multiplying them by the scaling factor @code{f}. 

@item -t, --transform=str
@itemx
Apply the linear transformation whose matrix is specified in file
@code{str}. 

@item -x, --extract=str
@itemx
Extract the specified components of the feature vector. The argument
@code{str} is a comma separated list of components to extract, where the
components are specified either as a single index or a range of indices
specified using a dash (@samp{-}). The index of the first component is
1.

@item -s, --start=n
@itemx
Start copying frames at frame index @code{n}. Frame numbers start with
zero. Default is 0.

@item -e, --end=n
@itemx
End copying at frame index @code{n} (included). Frame numbers start with
zero. Default is to copy to the end of stream.
@end table

@c Local Variables:
@c ispell-local-dictionary: "american"
@c End:
