@c
@c changes.texi -- SPro Reference Manual
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2003 Guillaume Gravier (guig@irisa.fr)
@c
@c $Author: guig $
@c $Date: 2010-11-09 16:57:22 +0100 (Tue, 09 Nov 2010) $
@c $Revision: 151 $
@c

@c --*-- -------- --*--
@c --*-- Changes  --*--
@c --*-- -------- --*--
@node Changes, Index, Reference guide, Top
@chapter Changes

@c
@c --*-- History --*--
@c
@menu
* History::                     The history of SPro
* Changes from previous version::  What's new from the previous version?
* Compatibility::               Is th current version compatible with the previous one?
@end menu

@node History, Changes from previous version, Changes, Changes
@section History

Here is a little bit of history before going into the details of the
changes between the two last version of SPro.

I started the SPro project in 1996 while working at @acronym{ELAN}
Informatique. At the time, SPro was nothing but a simple linear
prediction analysis library for a @acronym{CELP} coder.  

After I left this company to go as a Ph. D. Student at @acronym{ENST}
Paris, the project rapidly turned into a speech processing toolkit to
design front-end processing for speech and speaker recognition
algorithms. In particular, all those nice variable resolution spectral
analysis programs were developed for my work there. I left
@acronym{ENST} with SPro version 3.2, a rather stable version of the
toolkit but dependent upon non GPL code and upon other toolkits I used
to maintain.

After a short pause, the project restarted when I joined @acronym{IRISA}
as a @acronym{CNRS} fellow researcher. Version 3.2 then quickly turned
into version 3.3 which is the first truly GPL stand-alone distribution
of SPro. Version 3.3 also introduced the use of the @command{configure}
script which has made SPro developer's life easier since. 

Finally, it took quite a long time and several non fully documented
(3.3.1) or non distributed (3.3.2) intermediate versions of SPro before
the major rewrite that lead to version 4.0. Version 4.0 had basically
the same functionalities as had versions 3.x with the immense advantage
that the new version can handle signals of virtually infinite length via
the use of signal and feature streams. Implementing streamed I/O
mechanisms for waveforms and features required rewriting a lot of
functions and changing the SPro feature file format, @strong{thus
loosing both the command and the library compatibility} (see note on the
compatibility below). I took this opportunity of a major rewrite to
undergo modifications I had been willing to do for a long time.

Finally, in release 4.1, I added PLP analysis and a few goodies (see
changes below).

Apart from a few features that I would like to add to SPro, the toolkit
is pretty stable and no major modifications are scehduled in the near
(or even mid-term) future.
 
@c
@c --*-- Changes from previous version --*--
@c
@node Changes from previous version, Compatibility, History, Changes
@section Changes from previous version

The distribution license has been changed from GPL to a more permissive
MIT License.  Release 5.0 is in all point similar to 4.1 except for the
license change.

@c
@c --*-- Compatibility --*--
@c
@node Compatibility,  , Changes from previous version, Changes
@section Compatibility

Release 5.0 is fully compatible with 4.* releases.

In case you did not get it, @strong{from version 4.0, the compatibility
is lost with previous releases}. As mentioned previously, the main
reason for a new organization of SPro starting with version 4.0 is the
ability to process arbitrary length streams.

To enable arbitrary length streams, the feature file format has changed
and feature files (formerly known as data files) generated with a
version of SPro prior to 4.0 can not be used directly in 4.0 and above
versions. However, the @command{scopy} tool provides a compatibility
option which enables the import of feature files from previous SPro
releases.

The lack of compatibility also extends to the library. Programs based on
former releases of the library will not compile anymore.

@c Local Variables:
@c ispell-local-dictionary: "american"
@c End:
